We now look at another divide and conquer
algorithm, this is a geometric problem, given
a set of points we would like to compute the
closest pair of points among them.
So, recall that at the beginning of this set
of lectures to motivate the need for more
efficient algorithms, you consider the example
of a video game, if there are several objects
on the screen and you might want to find it
at any given point, the closest pair of objects
among them. So, for this again a naive algorithm
could be to explicitly compute the distance
between every pair of these n objects, which
should be an order n squared algorithm. So,
what we are going to see is that we can actually
use divide and conquer and produce an order
n log n algorithm for this problem.
So, formally we are looking at points in two
dimensions, so each point is given by an x
y coordinate x p, y p and we are using the
usual Euclidian notion of distance that is
the distance given by Pythagoras used formula,
which is that the distance between p 1 and
p 2 is the square root of x 2 minus x 1 whole
square plus y 2 minus y 1 whole square. So,
you just assume that there is a distance formula
which we can use whenever we want to compute
the distance between a pair of points.
So, our target is given a set of n points
p 1 to p n to find the closest pair among
them and it will be convenient for the analysis
of the algorithm that we are going to suggest
that no two points in this set have the same
x or y coordinate. So, every x coordinate
among these n x coordinates is different,
every y coordinate among these n coordinates
is different. Now, it can be extended by algorithm
we are going to show, it can be extended to
deal with the case where this assumption is
not true, but it will then unnecessarily complicate
the understanding of the algorithm.
So, let us just assume that we are solving
this special case of the problem, where every
point is at a different x coordinate and at
different y coordinate from every other point.
So, as we have seen a brute force solution
would be to try every pair, compute d of p
i p j and then report the minimum amount of
distances. So, this would be an order n squared
algorithm.
So, let us see first the same problem if we
had only one dimensional points. If we have
one dimensional points then all these points
lie along the line, which we can assume this
the x axis. So, we have a bunch of points
and we want to find the closest point. So,
what we can do is we can first sort them,
so that we have the points in increasing order
of x coordinate and then it is easy to see
that the distances that we need are the distances
between two adjacent points.
Because, if I look at a point, the nearest
point if either the one on it is left and
one on it is right. So, I just need to scan
this x 2 minus x 1 distance, then x 3 minus
x 2, so I just need to scan these n minus
1 distances and then keep track of the smallest
gap between these two points and that would
give me the smallest distance among the overall
pair of overall n points. So, here the algorithm
is n log n, because it takes n log n times
to sort the points in x coordinate, after
that finding the minimum is actually very
easy. So, in one dimension this problem is
very easy to solve, the challenge is to solve
it in two dimensions.
So, it two dimensions if we are going to use
divide and conquer, we need a way of separating
the points into two groups, of roughly equal
size or a hopefully exactly equal size. So,
a natural way is this is the geometric problem
is to separate them based on their positions.
So, this is my overall set of points, then
this natural to try and draw some kind of
a line and say that half the points are here
and half the points are there.
So, we will do it using a vertical line, so
we will split this set not by some arbitrary
line like this, but rather we will try and
split it by a vertical line. So, somewhere
which may not be half way across, because
the points may be scattered in an uneven way,
we will split it, so that there are exactly
the same number of points the left to the
line and to the right to the line.
So, now because of we divide and conquer thing
what we will do is, we will compute the smallest
distance among the points to the left, separately
we will compute the smallest distance points
from the right. But, this does not tell us
anything about distances between points on
the left and points on the right and they
could very well be points very close to each
other across the boundary.
So, I could have add four points here, four
points there and I could have add a pair of
points which spans this black line, which
are actually closer together, then any two
points to the left or two point to the right.
So, we need to compute the closest pairs across
the separating line and this is the challenge.
So, let us look a little closer at how we
do this. So, we will make a further step before
we do this thing recursively. Given our points
P we will compute points, the set of points
we will compute two sorted orders. So, we
will first scan these points by x coordinate
from left to right and we will list it in
this order and call it P x, then we will scan
this, the list P from...
So, we will sort on the y coordinate and call
this P y, so from P we will produce two list,
one sorted by x and one sorted by y. Then,
so we will assume that we have done this of
course, we can do this we know in order n
log n time right to the beginning. Now, the
next step is to do this recursive call and
so when we do the recursive call, because
we have P x sort it by x coordinate, we know
that the line that we need to draw is the
one that separates P x into two equal parts.
So, we need to go to the midpoint of P x and
draw a line at the x coordinate separating
the midpoint from the next point. So, the
position of this line is fixed once we know
P x, fix meaning we know between which two
points. Remember, we assume that no two points
at the same x coordinate, no two points at
the same y coordinate. So, I just look for
the median value or the value at the middle
of x, I draw a line there.
Now, I separately doubt into two equal parts
they assumption, because I have done this
able midpoint of P x. So, I have two set Q
and R, but in order to continue this recursion
I need to assume that Q is sorted in both
x and y and so is R. So, I need to assume
that I have some efficient way of extracting
for the each of these some problems, a similar
ordering of the points sorted by x, sorted
by y. So, I need to efficiently compute Q
x and Q y, R x and R y.
Q x and Q y is easy, because this whole thing
earlier was P x and then we split this thing
midpoint. So, everything to the left of the
midpoint is Q x and everything to the right
of the midpoint is R x. So, in one scan of
P x I go up to half way and I put everything
in Q x and then in half way point I put everything
in R x and I am done. Now, what about y? Now,
y the problem is as I am going up these two
points are in Q y, then this point goes into
R y because in the overall scheme of things
in P y, these are all listed globally by y
coordinate.
So, I would have to move this to R, then I
would to put this back into... So, next one
again possibly R any one how you use this,
the next one is Q and so on. So, as I am going
up some points going Q y and some going R
y. Now, how do I determine that without going
over this too many times, so the key is that
having done this split of x, we note this
dividing line. So, we know which x coordinate
separates Q from R.
So, as we go through P y, we will look at
each point and if the x coordinate is less
than this midpoint, so let us call this x
Q, if it is less than x Q, then we push it
into Q y, if it is x is greater than x Q then
we push it into R y and because if it is originally
sorted, we are building up Q y and R y also
in sorted order. So, ones scan of P y you
get Q y and R y. So, in linear time we can
take the given sorted list P x and P y and
separate it out into sorted list Q x, Q y
for the left half R x, R y for the right half.
So, now when we call our algorithm with closest
pair P x, P y it will split recursively into
closest pair Q x, Q y and R x, R y to the
left and right half. So, we will, you can
assume as usual that we will solve these recursively,
we will get the closest distance there. Now,
we have to worry about how to combine them,
how to take care of these points whose distance
pans the interval, the line separating the
two halves.
So, if we solve this problem on the left among
all the points in Q, I will identify some
pair of points as being the nearest pair with
the distance d Q. And now similarly, if I
do solve the problem right I would identify
some pair of points as being the minimum of
the right with distance d R. So, now we are
interested in this smaller or these two, because
the smaller are these two is a candidate for
the overall minimum distance.
So, now we are looking at points which could
be within at d Q is smaller than the d Q across
this boundary. So, let d be the minimum of
d Q and d R, so it is the smaller of these
two, so in this particular example d is d
Q. Now, the claim is that if you look at this
zone here which is plus minus d distance away
from the separated line, then if I have some
point outside this and if I want to look at
any point across on the other side, this distance
from here to here is key plus some distance
on either side therefore, it is more than
d.
So, it is more than the smaller of d Q and
d R, so it cannot be a candidate for our overall
smallest distance. So, these kind of things
are useless, there is no point in looking
for any line which is any pair whose one end
point is outside this zone. Because, if it
is outside the zone, then it can only be at
least b plus something away from something
on the other side to the line. So, it is enough
to look at points inside the zone on both
sides. So, we only need to consider points
across the separator which line within this
plus minus d, any pair outside this cannot
be the closest pair overall.
So, let us take a closer look, so this is
my plus minus d zone. Let, so this is minus
d, this is plus d. Now, what we are going
to do is, we are going to further break it
up into these squares of size d by 2, so I
had d by 2 plus d by 2. So, this whole thing
with d, I am going to construct all these
squares. So, the claim is that inside such
a box I can have at most one point, I cannot
have two points. Why, because the furthest
separation within a box is across the diagonal,
the further step two points can be in the
box is at 2 end points to the diagonal.
But, the diagonal of this square of size d
by 2 is square root of d by 2, so this is
some points 0.047 d. So, this is less than
d strictly less than d, but notice that this
square is completely on one side the right
times, either on the left or the right and
both on the left and right we know that the
minimum separation is d, there is no point
on one side of the line there are no two points
closer than d, because d is a minimum of d
Q and d R.
So, therefore in each of these boxes we can
have at most one point and now we start looking
at any point. So, look at a point here in
this box, now the claim is that if I have
to be within distance d, then how far away
can I be well, if you think about it the furthest
you can be or the furthest box you can go
to, go to that box. So, you can be a little
more careful about is, but it certainly cannot
be any further than that box.
So, if you have to go from this box basically
if we have to go more than this distance away,
then it will be more than d away. So, the
claim is that any point within this distance
d must lie within the next 4 by 4 segments.
So, we have to compare each point only against
15. Now of course, we will compare it will
one scan from bottom to top. So, this could
have the points below this they could again
compared when we consider those and before.
So, we will consider, we will do this scan
in this order as we will see in the net. So,
therefore, we only need to consider this point
against points in these 16 squares around
it. So, that is the fix number independent
of how many points they actually have.
So, formally what we will do is we have this
and this side we have Q y which is sorted
and this side we have R y which is sorted,
but remember they are both sorted. So, we
will do a kind of merge, so we will go through
Q y and R y we will pick the next one in sorted
y order between Q y and R y. If the x coordinate
is remember this is an x Q are originally
separating point plus d and minus d. If the
x coordinate of the point that be find is
between x Q plus d and x Q minus d, then we
will added to a list S y.
So, S y will now the sorted list of points
within this band from bottom to top extracted
from Q y and R y in linear line. Now, within
this list, these next 15 boxes, these boxes
will now be all ordered. So, if I just scan
them then I will find that I all these...
So, they would be possibly 4 points which
come from these 4 boxes, 4 from these 4 boxes
and so on. So, I can definitely find the next
15 points in this list and I compare only
with these. So, this is the linear scan.
So, in other words we have this following
algorithm, so we start with by assuming that
we have set off a problem. So, that P has
been split into two copies P x and P y sort
it by x, sort it by y. Now, if we have less
than 3 points, 3 points are less then, we
just do it by brute force compute them closest
pair and return the answer. So, the answer
consists of the distance and a pair, the points
which are at the distance, if it is more than
3 then we do this recursive thing.
So, we from P x and P y as we said we construct
Q x, Q y and R x, R y and this we saw we can
do linear time. Then, we have recursively
solve this solution, the solve problem of
Q and R and we will get these two distances
d x and d R from this we will take d to be
the minimum of d Q and d R. So, using this
we will set up this S y the list of all points
inside that zone and then we will scan that
list to find within that zone which are the
points, which are in closest distance d S.
Now, if d S is more than d Q the minimum of
d Q and d R, then s does not contribute anything,
but if it is less gives as the correct answer.
So, we will return either the d Q the answer
produce from the left or the answer produce
from the right or the answer produced from
our in between zone depending on which of
these distances is the smallest. So, this
is the basic algorithm you have to do a little
bit more work actually code it correctly,
but this gives the overall structure of the
algorithm.
So, we have a non recursive part which is
to first compute the initial sort it list
P x and P y, this takes order on n log n time
force. Because, sorting takes n log n time
then having set of this recursive thing the
overall recursive problem divides n points
into two sets of n by 2. So, we have a familiar
thing which is T of n is 2 times T of n by
2 and then because all the setting up time
and all these combining time is linear, we
have exactly the recurrence for merge sort.
So, therefore, the recursive part also gives
as order n log n, so we have a initial sorting
phase which n log n, we have a recursive part
which is n log n and therefore, overall this
algorithm is n log n.